# Building projects in Haskell

Cabal is the Haskell package and dependency manager. (Haskell's version of npm)

Cabal also builds the project

Use `cabal init` to initialise a cabal project, just like how you would run `npm init` to initialise an npm project.

```bash
mkdir <directory>
cabal init
```

Alternative way to initialise a cabal project

```bash
cabal init -n -l BSD3 --is-executable \
--language=Haskell2010 -u bitemyapp.com \
-a 'Chris Allen' -c User-interface \
-s 'Saying Hello' -p hello-haskell
```

.cabal-sandbox/ is added to .gitignore to ignore build artifacts (e.g. dependencies). Think of this as the equivalent to node_modules/

Build

```bash
cabal build
```

Run the ghci terminal without standard Prelude.

```bash
ghci -XNoImplicitPrelude
```

To import individual functions or entities from a module:

```bash
> import Module.Name (functionToImport)

# e.g. This only imports the 'bool' function
import Data.Bool (bool)
```

Qualified imports

Use `import qualified <module>` instead of `import <module>`

Then refer to imported functions using the qualified  name, so use `module.name.f` instead of simply `f`.

Aliases

We can also specify aliases with qualified imports.

```bash
Prelude> import qualified Data.Bool as B
```


You can load the GHCi using
```bash
cabal repl
```
This will load any default libraries or the first library if there are no defaults.


To load specific executables and libraries you can use the following, but ensure that you are in the project root:

```bash 
cabal repl <target_executable>
```


### 'do' syntax

'do' blocks are syntactic sugar for sequencing monadic actions. 

It provides a way of naming values returned by monadic actions so they they can be reused as inputs to actions that happen later but within the 'do' block's local scope.

```haskell
main :: IO String
main = do
        x1 <- getLine
        x2 <- getLine
        return (x1 ++ x2)
```

'<-' syntax is used to bind a variable extracted from a monadic structure to a name within the enclosing 'do' block scope.

Each '<-' assignment creates a new variable due to data being immutable in a purely functional language like Haskell.

The 'return' function returns a value after putting it inside a monadic structure. 

```haskell
main :: IO Bool
main = do c  <- getChar
          c' <- getChar
          c == c'
```

This doesn't work because 'main' returns a Bool rather than an IO Bool. We need the following.

```haskell
main :: IO Bool
main = do c  <- getChar
          c' <- getChar
          return (c == c')
```
