# Algebraic data types

Kinds -> Types -> Values

Types are static and resolve at compile time whereas values are dynamic and resolve at runtime.

```haskell
data Doggies a = 
    Husky a
  | Mastiff a
  deriving (Eq, Show)
```

1. Doggies is a type construcotr
2. Doggies has kind '* -> *'
3. Doggies String has kind *
4. Husky 10 has type Num a => Doggies a
5. Husky (10 :: Integer) has type Doggies Integer
6. Mastiff "Scooby Doo" has type Doggies [Char]
7. It's both a type constructor and a data constructor
8. It doesn't make sense to ask for the type of DogueDeBordeaux given that it isn't a value level constant.
9. DogueDeBordeaux "doggie!" has type DogueDeBordeaux [Char]

### newtype

The newtype is a data type that can only ever have a single unary data constructor.

```haskell
newtype Goats = Goats Int deriving (Eq, Show)
```
At runtime Goats is really an Int since the representation of newtypes and the type it contains are the same. 

newtypes can help give context to our types.

cf. 
tooManyGoats :: Int -> Bool
tooManyGoats' :: Goats -> Bool


### Language pragmas

These are extensions or special instructions telling the compiler to process input in ways beyond what the standard provides for.

The "GeneralizedNewtypeDeriving" language pragma tells the compiler to allow our newtype to reply on same typeclass instances of the type it contains. 

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE GeneralizedNewtypeDeriving #-}

class TooMany a where
  tooMany :: a -> Bool

instance TooMany Int where
  tooMany n = n > 42

newtype Goats = 
  Goats Int deriving (Eq, Show, TooMany)

-- Goats has the same typeclass instances as the type it contains; namely, the typeclass instances that Int has
```

Intermission exercise
Question 3 (p.397)

### Record syntax 

Record syntax is a way to write data constructors with labelled type arguments that let you reference the type arguments and which also serve as projection functions for acccessing them.

```haskell
data Person = Person { name :: String, age :: Int } deriving (Eq, Show)

name :: Person -> String
name (Person n _) = n

age :: Person -> Int
age (Person _ a) = a

x = Person "jared" 22
age x --returns 22
name x --returns "jared"
```

### Normal form (How does this work?)

Writing product data types in normal involves writing their data constructors as a 'sum of products'

Product types distribute over sum types

```haskell
 a * (b + c) -> (a * b) + (a * c)
--  assume a, b and c are set cardinalities
```
A stricter interpretation of normal form involves representing products with tuples and sums with Either.


While we can partially apply data constructors just like with partial function applications, with record syntax we must provide all type arguments. If some field or type argument is not initialised, then we run into bottom or undefined and when we do so we run into an infinite computation. 

