# Algebras

An algebra or algebraic structure is a set A together with a set of operations defined over A that have finite arity and a set of axioms.

[Algebraic structure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algebraic_structure)


Algebras can be implemented in Haskell with typeclasses. Typeclasses can define the set of operations defined over A where A is the set or type for which these operations are defined.

### Monoid
A Monoid is one such implementation of an algebra in Haskell.

A monoid is a binary associative operation with an identity. 

In other words, a monoid is a set over which a single function of arity 2 that satisfies the law of associativity is defined along with an identity value.

Associativity - the order in whicgh parentheses are placed make no difference to the evaluated result.

e.g. $(1 + 2) + 3 = 1 + (2 + 3)$

Identity - there exists a value such that when we pass it as one of the arguments, it's ignored and the other argument is returned.

An identity turns the binary associative operation into an identity function.

e.g. 0 for addition
$\forall n (n + 0) = n $

1 for multiplication
$\forall n (n \times 1) = n$

Monoid is a typeclass that generalises this set of operations over many types.


Typeclasses can represent sets of operations definable over many different types.

For example, the set of natural numbers under addition or multiplication is a monoid.

```haskell
type Monoid :: * -> Constraint
class Semigroup a => Monoid a where
  mempty :: a
  mappend :: a -> a -> a
  mconcat :: [a] -> a
  mconcat = foldr mappend mempty
```

With types that have more than one possible monoid, we use newtype to enforce the rule that each type should only have one instance of a given typeclass.


### Why use `newtype`?

1. Signal intent that you're using a wrapper for an underlying type. (newtype is limited to a single unary data constructor) 

2. Improved type safety - 

3. Add different typeclass instances to a type. (Effectively bypass the restriction on one unique instance of a given typeclass)

```haskell
-- e.g.
data Server = Server String
newtype Server' = Server' String
```

Here, we can define two implementations of the same typeclass, one for Server; another for Server', all the while

```haskell
newtype Sum a
newtype Product a
```

These are wrappers for the Num typeclass that define a monoid under addition and monoid under multiplication respectively.

We can say that X is a Monoid iff X has an instance of the Monoid typeclass.

### Orphan instances

An instance defined for a datatype and typeclass that does not belong to the same module as either the typeclass declaration or the datatype declaration.

Solutions:

1. Put instances together with the type declaration so you can't import the type without its instances.

2. Put instances in the same module as the typeclass definition so you can't the typeclass without its instances.

3. Define a newtype wrapper for the original type and define your typeclass instances for this type.

### Semigroup

A semigroup is a monoid without an identity.

In haskell, types with a canonical binary associative operation but with no identity are suitable fits for Semigroup.

